Nearly two hundred years after James Fenimore Cooper published The
Pioneers, the challenge of placing Cooper's central character in a
historical context remains paramount. Appearing first as a seventy
year-old man in the first volume of The Leatherstocking Tales, Natty
Bumppo emerged in Cooper's works as something of an enigma.  Though
Natty's experiences and actions comprise the core of Cooper's five-part
narrative, details of his origins and the nature of his obvious
symbolism are noticably lacking. Living on the literal edge of society
in Deleware Indian country, Natty is both frontiersman and Native
American; part of both the white world and the land of savages. In his
relatively undeveloped state in The Pioneers, Natty represents the
frontier in conflict with civilization and the law.

So who is Natty Bumppo? Described in The Pioneers as being "six feet
tall in his moccasins, thin and wiry, with grey eyes, sandy hair, a
large mouth and rather heavy eyebrows," Natty appears physically as a
cross between his best friend, the Indian Chingachgook, and his nemesis,
Judge Temple. This juxtaposition is well-intentioned; critique James
Wallace writes that Cooper wanted Natty "to combine a popular tradition
of the eloquence of Indian oratory with the garrulity of a frontier
character."

In light of his dual identity, Natty is Cooper's vehicle for the
expression of the author's personal views about the mores of eighteenth
and early nineteenth century America. Throughout The Leatherstocking
Tales, Natty agrees with Cooper's concept of a firmly class-structured
society. He dislikes the French, the Iroquis, and Catholics, and shows
disdain for miscegenation. Nonetheless, Natty holds his own apart from
his creator. Filled with contradictions, Natty combines "the soul of a
poet with the nature of a redneck." He craves companionship yet trusts
no one, is used by all yet owes nothing to anyone, and craves
traditional society while fearing and despising civilization. In the
words of literary critique Duncan Heyward, Natty is "a noble shoot from
the stock of human nature, which never could attain its proper elevation
and importance, for no other reason than because it grew in the forest"
